it's one thing to provide food and
shelter in return for protection but
it's quite another thing to be compelled
to provide a home where before there was
none but some insects have the ability
to force a plant to do just that
they're called Gollum acres and this oak
tree is infested with them this odd
wrinkled object at the base of an acorn
is known as an opera
inside there's a tiny grub of a Miley
wasp to understand how it got there we
have to go back to last spring
this tiny insect scarcely bigger than a
mosquito is one of these gall wasps
there are lots of them flying around the
earth flowers most of the flowers by now
have been pollinated and are about to
develop into acorns the goal was to have
mated and this female is looking for the
place to lay her eggs she thrusts her
ovipositor into the base of the
fertilized flower and injects an egg and
that triggers a profound genetic change
in the growing oak bun it develops not
into an acorn but into something very
different a Gore within the tiny larvae
whose secretions have caused the change
feeds on the oak trees tissues as summer
proceeds the goals become increasingly
hard and woody
[Music]
autumn comes and the oak tree starts to
shed its leaves it's shutting down to
the winter and with its leaves go both
acorns and goals
[Music]
plant and insect life is suspended but
unseen changes are nevertheless taking
place spring comes at last
inside the Gaul something starts moving
the lava has turned into an adult wasp
it has spent nine months within the oak
trees tissues it is only a few weeks of
its life left
[Music]
now as an adult it must look for another
oak to inject with eggs
[Music]
a single entry may be afflicted by 70
different kinds of growth each produced
by different species of wasp and each
with its own particular contorted shape
these hard shells may seem to be
effective defenses for the little grub
inside them but not necessarily cell
this is another kind of gall wasp and
she's not a genetic engineer she is a
burglar behind her she trails her
equipment for breaking and entering a
drill she carefully selects a site for
her operations and takes aim
she flits away the drill sheath and
starts work aim has to be very accurate
if she's to strike a target the lava at
the goal center the tip of her drill has
a sharp cutting edge of metallic zinc
which pierces the gall tissues with ease
when she detects that she's reached the
central chamber a microscopic egg
travels down the center of the drill and
into the lava the operation is over her
offspring will now hatch in the gall
center consume the flesh of the resident
larvae and take over the gall